





Network Working Group                                  Giuseppe Paterno'
Internet-Draft                                    Independent Consultant
Expires: March 2007                                       September 2006


           DHCP Option for LDAP Directory Services discovery


Status of this Memo

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.   Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.   It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

Abstract

   This document defines an experimental DHCP option for delivering
   configuration information for LDAP services. Through this option, the
   client receives an LDAP URL [8] of the closest available LDAP
   server/replica that can be used to authenticate users or look up any
   useful data.














G. Paterno'          draft-gpaterno-dhcp-ldap-03.txt            [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                                            September 2006


1. Introduction

   The Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) [1] is an access
   protocol for directories. LDAP allows distributed environment so that
   replica copies exists into a given organization or even the Internet.
   In most organizations, LDAP is used to allow user authentication and
   databases lookup such as hosts, groups or e-mail addresses.

   The current methodologies of defining LDAP parameters are limited to
   statically configuring the servers into the clients or seldom by
   specifying them into the appropriate DNS RR records [2]. The
   disadvantage of the first solution is that the client is unable to
   dynamically reconfigure/provision the system, while the disadvantage
   of the last solution is that the client is unable to locate the
   closest available replica, therefore not optimizing the network for
   large organizations.

   The need is to have a methodology to autoconfigure LDAP clients with
   the closest available replica: the advantages provide relief in
   administration tasks and optimization of configuration of mobile
   clients (ex: laptops, PDAs, ...) or devices (ex: multifunction
   printers, IP phones, ...).

   This specification describe an experimental DHCP option [5] that
   carries LDAP information for the clients of the network. The LDAP URL
   Option delivers an LDAP URL string to the client in accordance to RFC
   2255 [8].  An LDAP URL contains several useful information, such as
   Base DN or search scope, that helps the client in looking up
   information on the LDAP server.

2. LDAP URL Option

   This option specifies the LDAP URL that the client will autoconfigure
   for the directory lookups. The LDAP URL option has to be encoded in
   accordance of RFC 2255 [8] and the string should NOT be zero
   terminated.

   The code for this option is 95.  The maximum possible length for this
   option is 255 bytes. Note: this option is listed in [4], but has to
   be confirmed by IANA. See IANA Considerations for details.

          Code Len   LDAP URL
         +-----+----+----+----+----+----+--
         | 96  | n  | c1 | c2 | c3 | c4 |  ...
         +-----+----+----+----+----+----+--






G. Paterno'          draft-gpaterno-dhcp-ldap-03.txt            [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                                            September 2006


3. Considerations on LDAP access

   The Base DN is not always enough to lookup an entry in the LDAP
   directory, expecially when user authentication and profiling (UID,
   GID, ...) is involved.  The LDAP directory might be structured in
   different ways in the organization and cannot be determined in
   advance. As such, whenever is not specified, for user
   authentication/profiling the client should lookup information as for
   RFC-2307 [3], i.e.:

   - Users should be under the "ou=People" organizational unit;
   - Groups should be under the "ou=Group" organizational unit;
   - Hosts should be under the "ou=Hosts" organizational unit.

   Geographically distributed environments should have a different Base
   DN for countries or locations and DHCP hosts in that location should
   receive LDAP Base DN accordingly, es: "dc=italy, dc=example, dc=com".

   This hierarchy is recommended, but not mandatory. If the hierarchy
   can't be defined in advance, a subtree scope is highly recommended.
   The client, be either an authentication mechanism or a general lookup
   (say an e-mail client), MUST perform a subtree search of the base DN
   when the "sub" scope have been specified in the LDAP URL.

4. Security Considerations

   DHCP currently provides no authentication or security mechanisms.
   Potential exposures to attack are discussed in section 7 of the DHCP
   protocol specification [5]. In particular, these DHCP options allow
   an unauthorized DHCP server to misdirect an LDAP client to a
   nonexistent LDAP server or even a spoofed LDAP server. These threats
   are similar to any DHCP options specified.  Whenever any potential
   intruder might connect to the network (say for example in a Wireless
   environment), the author suggests to introduce IEEE 802.1x to enforce
   network access.

   Whenever sensitive information has to be looked up in the LDAP
   directory, the author strongly suggests to use SSL to secure the
   communication channel between the client and the server. This MUST be
   specified by providing "ldaps" as the URL scheme (eg:
   "ldaps://ldap.example.com/").

   For security reason, an administrator or even default server
   configuration might deny anonymous bind the to LDAP server. Although
   the bindname extension can be used (as for [8]), the author suggests
   not to specify such option because DHCP information are sent over a
   clear channel, therefore can be easily eavesdropped.  The author
   suggests two methodologies.  The first is to use a restricted



G. Paterno'          draft-gpaterno-dhcp-ldap-03.txt            [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                                            September 2006


   anonymous access to LDAP: through the use of ACLs/ACIs is possible to
   restrict information that an anonymous clients might request/receive.
   The second -preferred- is that the client should use its own
   credential (be a human user or a machine account), such as kerberos
   ticket or PKI certificate, to authenticate against the LDAP server.

5. IANA Considerations

   IANA has assigned a value of 95 for the DHCP LDAP server option
   described in this document. However this option has been recovered
   [4] because no-one has published an RFC and therefore is ready to be
   reassigned: it has to be confirmed by IANA.

6. References

      [1] Wahl, M., Howes, T. and S. Kille,
          "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (v3)",
          RFC-2251, December 1997.

      [2] A. Gulbrandsen,  P. Vixie,
          "A DNS RR for specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)",
          RFC-2052, October 1996.

      [3] L. Howard,
          "An Approach for Using LDAP as a Network Information Service",
          RFC-2307, March 1998.

      [4] R. Droms,
          "Unused Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) Option Codes",
          RFC-3679, January 2004.

      [5] Alexander, S. and R. Droms,
          "DHCP Options and BOOTP Vendor Extensions",
          RFC-2132, March 1997.

      [6] Bradner, S.,
          "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels",
          RFC-2119, March 1997.

      [7] Droms, R.,
          "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol",
          RFC-2131, March 1997.

      [8] T. Howes, M. Smith,
          "The LDAP URL Format"
          RFC-2255, December 1997

      [9] J. Hodges, R. Morgan,  M. Wahl,



G. Paterno'          draft-gpaterno-dhcp-ldap-03.txt            [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                                            September 2006


          "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (v3):
          Extension for Transport Layer Security",
          RFC-2830, May 2000

Copyright and disclaimer

   Copyright (C) Giuseppe Paterno' (2006).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the author of this document or
   other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the author or its successors or assigns.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

7. Author's Address

   Giuseppe Paterno'
   Casella Postale 27
   20090 Trezzano Sul Naviglio (MI)
   Italy
   E-mail: gpaterno@gpaterno.com





G. Paterno'          draft-gpaterno-dhcp-ldap-03.txt            [Page 5]
