

Network Working Group                                        Rob Weltman
INTERNET-DRAFT                             Netscape Communications Corp.
                                                        February 7, 2000


                   LDAP Proxied Authorization Control
                   draft-weltman-ldapv3-proxy-04.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Task Force
   (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
   may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document defines support for the Proxied Authorization Control.
   Controls are an LDAP protocol version 3 extension, to allow passing
   arbitrary control information along with a standard request to a
   server, and to receive arbitrary information back with a standard
   result. The Proxied Authorization Control allows a connection with
   sufficient privileges to assume the identity of another entry for the
   duration of an LDAP request.


1. Introduction

   Version 3 of the LDAP protocol provides a means of supplying
   arbitrary additional information along with a request to an LDAP
   server, and receiving arbitrary additional response information. The
   Control protocol extension is described in [1], section 4.1.12. This
   document defines support for proxied authorization using the Control
   mechanism.

   The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", and "MAY" used in this document  are
   to be interpreted as described in [2].



Expires August 2000                                           [Page 1]

PROXIED AUTHORIZATION CONTROL                            February 2000


2. Publishing support for the Proxied Authorization Control

   Support for the Proxied Authorization Control is indicated by the
   presence of the OID "2.16.840.1.113730.3.4.12" in the
   supportedExtensions attribute of a server's root DSE.


3. Proxied Authorization Control


   This control may be included in any bind, unbind, search, compare,
   abandon, modify, delete, or modrdn request message as part of the
   controls field of the LDAPMessage, as defined in [1].

   proxyAuthControl ::= SEQUENCE {
           controlType     2.16.840.1.113730.3.4.12,
           criticality     BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE,
           controlValue    proxyAuthValue
   }

   The criticality MUST be included and MUST be TRUE.

   The controlValue contains the BER encoding of a DN used for
   evaluating the requested rights:

   proxyAuthValue::= SEQUENCE {
           proxyDN LDAPDN
   }

   It is represented as a Sequence in order to allow future extensions.
   Implementations MUST return the error code
   unsupportedCriticalExtension in the event of unrecognized additional
   elements in the sequence


4. Permission to execute as proxy

   An LDAP server supporting the Proxied Authorization Control may
   choose to honor or not honor a particular request. If the control is
   supported but a particular request is denied, the server MUST return
   the error code insufficientAccessRights. A typical implementation
   will evaluate if the requester has proxy access rights at the base DN
   of the request. If the requester has proxy access rights, and if the
   proxy DN corresponds to a valid entry in the directory managed by the
   server, the request will be honored. If the request is honored, it
   will be executed as if submitted by the proxy identity.

   During evaluation of a search request, an entry which would have been
   returned for the search if submitted by the proxy identity directly
   may not be returned if the server finds that the requester does not
   have proxy rights to the entry, even if the entry is within the scope
   of a search request under a base DN which does imply such rights.
   This means that fewer results, or no results, may be returned

Expires August 2000                                            [Page 2

PROXIED AUTHORIZATION CONTROL                            February 2000


   compared to the case where the proxy identity issued the request
   directly. An example of such a case may be a system with fine-grained
   access control, where the proxy right requester has proxy rights at
   the top of a search tree, but not at or below a point or points
   within the tree.


5. Security Considerations

   The Proxied Authorization Control method is subject to standard LDAP
   security considerations. The control may be passed over a secure as
   well as over an insecure channel. No additional confidential
   information is passed in the control.

   Note that the server is responsible for determining if a proxied
   authorization request is to be honored.


6. Copyright

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


7. Bibliography

   [1]  M. Wahl, T. Howes, S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory Access
        Protocol (v3)", RFC 2251, December 1997.



Expires August 2000                                            [Page 3

PROXIED AUTHORIZATION CONTROL                            February 2000


   [2]  Bradner, Scott, "Key Words for use in RFCs to Indicate
        Requirement Levels", draft-bradner-key-words-03.txt, January,
        1997.


8. Author's Addresses

   Rob Weltman
   Netscape Communications Corp.
   MV-068
   501 E. Middlefield Rd.
   Mountain View, CA 94043
   USA
   +1 650 937-3301
   rweltman@netscape.com


9. Changes from draft-weltman-ldapv3-proxy-03.txt


10. Changes from draft-weltman-ldapv3-proxy-02.txt


10.1 Renamed Control


   The Control is now called Proxied Authorization Control, rather than
   Proxied Authentication Control, to reflect that no authentication
   occurs as a consequence of processing the Control.

10.2 Control envelope


   Rather than containing an LDAPDN as the Control value, the Control
   contains a Sequence (which contains an LDAPDN). This is to provide
   for future extensions.




















Expires August 2000                                            [Page 4
