


Network Working Group                                            M. Wahl
Internet-Draft                                     Informed Control Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                       December 12, 2006
Expires: June 15, 2007


                     P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP
                         draft-wahl-ldap-p3p-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 15, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).














Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


Abstract

   This document defines attributes for use in the Lightweight Directory
   Access Protocol (LDAP) which contain URIs for privacy policy
   documents.  These documents describe the privacy policy concerning
   access to a directory server, and the privacy policies that apply to
   the contents of the directory (a subtree of entries).












































Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


1.  Introduction

   The W3C Platform for Privacy Preferences 1.1 (P3P1.1) specifications
   [1] describe an XML document format for encoding privacy policy
   information for an Internet-accessible resource.  The initial
   targeted application for P3P was web sites accessed by web browsers
   using HTTP, and thus the specifications include a lookup mechanisms
   and conventions for how to find a P3P document governing a web site.
   These mechanisms are specific to the HTTP protocol and do not
   translate well into other protocols that use URIs which are not HTTP
   URIs.

   One of the major network-accessible repositories of personal
   information within an enterprise is its directory service.  It is
   desirable to be able to determine the privacy policy of a directory
   service: what policy statements does the enterprise make concerning
   the contents of the directory?  In addition, as most directory
   servers log personal identifiers in their log files, it is also
   desirable to be able to determine the privacy policy of the directory
   server itself.

   This document discusses how LDAP clients can obtain the URI of a P3P
   privacy policy statement from a directory server via LDAPv3 [2].

   These attributes enable a directory client to retrieve the privacy
   policies and ensure their appropriateness to the planned interaction,
   before sending further requests to the directory server.

   The words "MUST", "SHOULD" and "MAY" are used as defined in RFC 2119
   [3].

   Please send comments to the author at mark.wahl@informed-control.com.



















Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


2.  Policy documents

   The attributes defined in this document contain Uniform Resource
   Identifiers (URIs) [4].  The URIs are anticipated to be of a scheme,
   such as http [7], which has a protocol for the retrieval of an XML
   document.  This document does not define how to retrieve XML content
   from the directory server itself; it is expected that an LDAP client
   that wishes to parse P3P-formatted XML documents would also be
   capable of having an HTTP client embedded within it, it just needs to
   know what HTTP URI to use to obtain the document.

   Unlike the use of privacy policies by web sites accessed via HTTP as
   described in section 2 of P3P1.1 [1], this specification does not
   incorporate the indirection procedures of the policy reference file.
   (Policy reference files are not used as their INCLUDE and EXCLUDE
   elements assume a relative URL hierarchy that incompatible with the
   hierarchy used in LDAP URLs, and the policy documents are likely
   stored on a different kind of server than the directory server
   itself).  Instead, the URI retrieved from the directory server
   directly identifies the document containing the POLICIES element, and
   the POLICY within that element.

   The URI stored in the directory attributes defined in the sections
   below MUST identify a file which is an UTF-8 encoded XML format
   document.  That file MUST contain a POLICIES element, as defined in
   section 3.2 of P3P1.1 [1].  The URI MUST contain a URI fragment that
   specifies the name of the policy within that POLICIES element.

   For example, a directory entry might contain the attribute

       subtreeP3PrivacyPolicy: http://www.example.com/pol.xml#policy-ds

   The client SHOULD then attempt to contact the server for
   www.example.com via HTTP, and obtain the file /pol.xml.

   The policy file is UTF-8 encoded, and defined in section 3.2 of
   P3P1.1 [1].














Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


   A policy file might resemble (contents simplified for readability):


       <POLICIES xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2002/01/P3Pv1">
            <POLICY name="policy-www"
             discuri="http://www.example.com/disc.html"> ... </POLICY>
            <POLICY name="policy-ds"
             discuri="http://www.example.com/disc.html">
                <ENTITY>
                   ...
                </ENTITY>
                <ACCESS>
                   ...
                </ACCESS>
                <DISPUTES-GROUP>
                   ...
                </DISPUTES-GROUP>
                <STATEMENT>
                   ...
                </STATEMENT>
            </POLICY>
       </POLICIES>

   The client would then locate the POLICY element which has a name
   matching that of the fragment in the URI, policy-ds.  The POLICY
   element is defined in section 3.2.2 of P3P1.1, and the client
   processing of this information MUST be in accordance with section
   2.4.4 of P3P1.1.























Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


3.  Attribute for Directory Server Privacy Policy

   The serverP3PrivacyPolicy attribute publishes the policy of the
   directory server as it relates to collecting data from the LDAP
   client.  The purpose of this attribute is to ensure that directory
   clients have the ability to become aware of the privacy implications
   of further interactions with a particular directory server.  Based on
   this information, the directory client might choose to disconnect or
   might present an end user with information on the privacy policy.

   The semantics of this attribute are analogous to those of a web
   server publishing via HTTP and P3P the policy for browsers accessing
   a web site hosted on that server.  Specifically, it informs the
   directory client that operation requests sent to the directory server
   might be used for one or more purposes, as described in the policy
   document.

   The attribute type is defined as follows (with lines wrapped for
   readability):

       attributeTypes: ( 1.3.6.1.4.1.21008.97.74.1.1
                        NAME 'serverP3PrivacyPolicy'
                        EQUALITY caseExactMatch
                        SYNTAX 1.3.6.1.4.1.1466.115.121.1.15
                        SINGLE-VALUE USAGE directoryOperation )

   The value is a single URI, which is encoded as a string in the UTF-8
   charset.  The form of URI is specified in section 2 above.  The
   caseExactMatch and Directory String syntax are defined in RFC 4517
   [6].

   This attribute MAY be present in the directory server's root DSE.
   The attribute is retrievable if a client performs a base object
   search of the root DSE (with a distinguished name of zero length)
   with a filter of "(objectClass=*)", as described in section 5.1 of
   RFC 4512 [5].















Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


4.  Attribute for Directory Subtree Privacy Policy

   The subtreeP3PrivacyPolicy attribute publishes the policy of the
   directory service as it relates to the privacy protection of a
   subtree of entries, typically entries representing individual
   persons, that are in a particular subtree of the directory.

   The semantics of this attribute is different from that of the
   previous section.  This attribute provides a directory client that
   might be searching and extracting information from a particular
   directory subtree information about individuals, with the privacy
   policy governing that information.  How these individuals'
   information was entered into the directory is outside of the scope of
   this document, but is is assumed that the privacy policy applied to
   the gathering of this information, and SHOULD be respected by clients
   that are searching it.

   The attribute type is defined as follows:

       attributeTypes: ( 1.3.6.1.4.1.21008.97.74.1.2
                        NAME 'subtreeP3PrivacyPolicy'
                        EQUALITY caseExactMatch
                        SYNTAX 1.3.6.1.4.1.1466.115.121.1.15
                        SINGLE-VALUE )

   The value is a single URI, which is encoded as a string in the UTF-8
   charset.  The form of URI is specified in section 2 above.  The
   caseExactMatch and Directory String syntax are defined in RFC 4517
   [6].

   This attribute MAY be present in any entry.

   In order to allow this class to be present on objects of many
   different structural classes, an auxiliary object class is defined.

       objectClasses: ( 1.3.6.1.4.1.21008.97.74.1.3
                       NAME 'subtreeP3PrivacyPolicyClass'
                       AUXILIARY
                       MAY ( subtreeP3PrivacyPolicy ) )

   This auxiliary class might most usefully be combined with the
   organization or organizationalUnit classes.

   Clients MUST NOT assume the absence of this class in an entry's
   objectClass implies that the subtreeP3PrivacyPolicy attribute is not
   present in the entry, as this attribute might be part of a privately-
   defined schema object class, or be provided through collective
   attributes.



Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


   A client SHOULD locate this attribute in entries which are typically
   used for the base object of subtrees of entries representing people,
   before searching to extract data from those entries.  For example,
   the attribute may be stored in the base organization entry, or in an
   organizationalUnit entry for a particular category of users (such as
   employees or customers).

   Representation of privacy policy links in deployments intending to
   apply multiple privacy policies within a naming content is outside of
   the scope of this document.









































Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


5.  Data Schema

   This document does not attempt to define a general mapping between
   the LDAP schema representation and the P3P Basic Data Structures and
   base data schema.

   For a policy referenced by a serverP3PPrivacyPolicy, the anticipated
   P3P data structures that would be used in the policy would be those
   of the login, cert, access log and Internet addresses of sections 5.5
   of P3P1.1 [1].  The login id would correspond to the distinguished
   name or other identifier which the client provides in an
   authenticated bind request.  A client which sends add, modify or
   modDN operations SHOULD also check for the subtreeP3PrivacyPolicy for
   the subtree in which these operations are targeted.





































Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


6.  Security Considerations

   This document addresses two security concerns with LDAP directories.

   The first concern is that most directory servers maintain a log of
   client requests.  For each connection, the log might contain the
   incoming connection's source IP addresses, the distinguished name or
   other forms of identity used in bind requests, the type and fields of
   requests sent by the client, as well as the server's responses.  This
   log may contain personally identifiable information, particularly
   bind information, as well as information that could later be
   correlated with other server's log information, in order to identify
   the user and their patterns of operations.  Some organizations which
   operate directory services, in particular publicly accessible
   services or those which are available to the organization's partners
   and customers, may wish to advertise the privacy policy of their
   directory servers, in order to ensure that persons operating
   directory clients accessing those servers are aware of what data is
   being collected and the procedures surrounding this.

   The second concern is that most directories contain a significant
   quantity of personally identifiable and personal information about
   individuals who are represented by entries in the directory.
   Directory clients SHOULD ensure that information which is obtained
   from the directory is handled in such a way that the privacy
   protections asserted for those individual's information is not
   violated.  This document defines a mechanism for a client to at least
   be able to obtain the privacy protection requirements in the form of
   a P3P policy element, and a client application which parses this can
   determine whether its handling of the information is in accordance
   with the policy.

   Directory server deployments which provide unrestricted or public
   access to information SHOULD permit clients to search to retrieve the
   serverP3PrivacyPolicy attribute from the root DSE without needing to
   have bound.  The server SHOULD also consider this operation part of
   the P3P "Safe Zone", as described in section 2.4.3 of P3P1.1 [1].

   Directory clients SHOULD exercise good practice when determining how
   to access the resources identified by the URIs present in the
   serverP3PrivacyPolicy and subtreeP3PrivacyPolicy attributes.

   Section 7 of RFC 3986 [4] also discusses security considerations when
   handling URIs.







Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


7.  IANA Considerations

   The following declarations will be submitted to IANA to register the
   attribute type and object class definitions.


      Subject: Request for LDAP Descriptor Registration
      Descriptor (short name): serverP3PrivacyPolicy
      Object Identifier: 1.3.6.1.4.1.21008.97.74.1.1
      Person & email address to contact for further information:
      Mark Wahl <Mark.Wahl@informed-control.com>
      Usage: attributeTypes
      Specification: RFC XXXX
      Author/Change Controller: IESG
      Comments:


      Subject: Request for LDAP Descriptor Registration
      Descriptor (short name): subtreeP3PrivacyPolicy
      Object Identifier: 1.3.6.1.4.1.21008.97.74.1.2
      Person & email address to contact for further information:
      Mark Wahl <Mark.Wahl@informed-control.com>
      Usage: attributeTypes
      Specification: RFC XXXX
      Author/Change Controller: IESG
      Comments:


      Subject: Request for LDAP Descriptor Registration
      Descriptor (short name): subtreeP3PrivacyPolicyClass
      Object Identifier: 1.3.6.1.4.1.21008.97.74.1.3
      Person & email address to contact for further information:
      Mark Wahl <Mark.Wahl@informed-control.com>
      Usage: objectClasses
      Specification: RFC XXXX
      Author/Change Controller: IESG
      Comments:














Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Cranor, L., Dobbs, B., Egelman, S., Hogben, G., Humphrey, J.,
        Langheinrich, M., Marchiori, M., Presler-Marshall, M., Reagle,
        J., Schunter, M., Stampley, D., and R. Wenning, "The Platform
        for Privacy Preferences 1.1 (P3P1.1) Specification",
        February 2006, <http://www.w3.org/TR/P3P11/>.

   [2]  Zeilenga, K., "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP):
        Technical Specification Road Map", RFC 4510, June 2006.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, BCP 14, March 1997.

   [4]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
        Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 3986,
        January 2005.

   [5]  Zeilenga, K., "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP):
        Directory Information Models", RFC 4512, June 2006.

   [6]  Legg, S., "LDAP: Syntaxes and Matching Rules", RFC 4517,
        June 2006.

8.2.  Informative References

   [7]  "Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.






















Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


Appendix A.  Copyright

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2006.  This document is subject to
   the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except
   as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.  This
   document and the information contained herein are provided on an "AS
   IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR
   IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.







































Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


Author's Address

   Mark Wahl
   Informed Control Inc.
   PO Box 90626
   Austin, TX  78709
   US

   Email: mark.wahl@informed-control.com










































Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       P3P Policy Attributes for LDAP        December 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Wahl                      Expires June 15, 2007                [Page 15]

