
LDAPEXT                                                      D. Elliott
Internet Draft                                            Aventail Corp
Document: <draft-elliott-ldapext-spdna-recrecs-00.txt>        N. Greene
Category: Informational                                 Nortel Networks
                                                              S. Miklos
                                                        Dept of Defense
                                                          November 2000

          Recommendations for Recording Directory Access Data

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   The Service Provider Directory-enabled Network Applications WG in
   the Directory Interoperability Forum of the Open Group (see
   http://www.sp-dna.org) is looking at the use of LDAP-accessible
   directories for Service Provider applications. In the course of this
   work, we have found a few areas where existing LDAP standards do not
   meet all the needs for a directory. This document addresses one such
   area - logging and auditing.

   SP-DNA directory systems are required to record and log all access
   to directory data. This is necessary for three main reasons: to
   check that access control on the directory is functioning properly,
   to detect and respond to access control policy violation, and to
   facilitate recovery and repair of directory data in the event of
   data loss.

   Our applications are not unique in these areas: we feel that many
   other directory applications will run into the same issues. For
   example, any mission-critical application that uses a directory will
   probably have similar needs for logging and audit. This document
   lists some of the requirements we would like to see addressed to
   make LDAP better suited to our applications, and to many others with
   similar characteristics.
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000



   Table of Contents

   1. Introduction
   2. Conventions used in this document
   3. Why record directory access events?
   3.1 Checking access control
   3.2 Detection and response to potential policy violation
   3.3 Directory recovery/repair
   4. Requirements
   4.1 Access to recorded data
   4.2 LDAP trackingId
   4.3 Configuration of the recording function
   4.3.1 General
   4.3.2 Kinds of events to record
   4.4 What to record
   4.5 Storage of recorded information
   4.5.1 Local storage
   4.5.2 Central storage
   4.5.3 Audit data in transit
   4.6 Review of recorded info: reports, alarms, automated responses
   5. Security considerations
   6. References
   7. Acknowledgements
   8. Authors' Addresses


1. Introduction

   The Service Provider Directory-enabled Network Applications WG in
   the Directory Interoperability Forum of the Open Group (see
   http://www.sp-dna.org) is looking at the use of LDAP-accessible
   directories for Service Provider applications. In the course of this
   work, we have found a few areas where existing LDAP standards do not
   meet all the needs for a directory. This document addresses one such
   area - logging and auditing.

   Our SP-DNA applications are not unique in these areas: we feel that
   many other directory applications will run into the same issues. For
   example, any mission-critical application that uses a directory will
   probably have similar needs for logging and audit. This document
   lists some of the requirements we would like to see addressed to
   make LDAP better suited to our applications, and to many others with
   similar characteristics.


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000


   Some terminology used in examples (e.g., user, subscriber) is
   specific to SP-DNA. These terms are defined in [3]. Other documents
   referenced in general are noted in [4], [5], and [6].


3. Why record directory access events?

3.1 Checking access control

   The first goal, and most common use of logged directory access
   information, is to document the proper functioning of access
   controls. Note that this type of reporting only provides a record of
   the proper functioning of controls/access decisions. It does not
   document access that successfully circumvents controls.


3.2 Detection and response to potential policy violation

   Another goal of logged directory access information is to detect
   policy violation by analyzing activities related to the directory,
   identifying attack profiles, and responding to access policy
   violations


3.3 Directory recovery/repair

   A third goal of logged directory access information is to record
   information that will facilitate the recovery and repair of data.


4. Requirements

4.1 Access to recorded data

   The level of security provided for recorded directory access
   information must be the same as that provided for the directory data
   being recorded.

   For example, in an SP-DNA environment, only certain administrative
   roles have control of and access to recorded data. Having a set of
   standard administrative roles allows applications using the
   directory to use roles other than "directory root" for
   administration, which increases overall security.

   a) It must be possible to assign one designated Administrator (e.g.,
   in SP-DNA, the "Directory Administrator"),  to have the ability to
   configure and control the recording of security-related events to a
   log, be able to access the recorded data, and take action based upon
   it.

   b) It must be possible to assign one Administrator (e.g., in SP-DNA,
   the "Service Provider Administrator") to be able to view, but not
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000


   change, recorded directory access data, and take action based upon
   it.

   c) It should be possible to allow selective viewing of the data. For
   example, one kind of administrator may only be allowed to view data
   pertaining to its own users, and not data pertaining to any other
   users or subscribers in the directory (e.g., in SP-DNA, the
   "Subscriber Administrator"). This would require that the audit logs
   be filtered so that only data the administrator is allowed to see
   can be viewed.

   d) It must not be possible for any user, other than the designated
   administrator, to view recorded directory access data or configure
   the recorded directory access function.

   e) It must not be possible for anyone, including all Administrator
   roles, to modify the recorded directory data without detection.


4.2 LDAP trackingId

   A long term requirement is to include a trackingId on LDAP commands
   to help in following recorded directory access threads across
   distributed systems. For example, it may be necessary to synchronize
   the logs from the application server, web server and directory
   server that were involved in processing one particular LDAP user
   request. 


4.3 Configuration of recording function

4.3.1 General

   a) The system must allow a designated Administrator to configure
   which events generate log records (e.g. add/remove/modify), and the
   level of detail for each record.

   b) Any changes to the configuration of directory logging must
   themselves be auditable events.

   c) The designated Administrator must be able to enable/disable the
   directory logging function

   d) The act of enabling/disabling directory logging function must
   itself be an auditable event that cannot be disabled.

   e) It must be possible to configure how data logs are handled, and
   to configure log file location on local and remote host(s).

   f) The system must allow the configuration of data log archiving: by
   period (hours/days/weeks), by date/time, and/or by maximum size.
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000


   g) It should be possible to define the total number/size of log
   files to be maintained, and what to do in the event these parameters
   are reached.

   h) It should be possible to perform manual log file rotation.


4.3.2 Kinds of events to record

   Some of these events would occur outside the directory. If this is
   the case, a logging function would still need a way to record them,
   but it cannot be specified as part of the directory system (and thus
   how those particular events are recorded is outside the scope of
   LDAPext).

   These events all occur in relation to the directory, and thus are
   within the scope of the LDAPext WG work:

   - Startup and shutdown of the recording function;
   - Both successful and unsuccessful privileged user logins;
   - Audit log failure due to storage exhaustion or network failure;
   - Directory service shutdowns and restarts;
   - All unsuccessful attempts to access resources;
   - Changes to security function that affects what is being recorded;
   - Changes to security mechanisms;
   - All requests to perform an operation on an object covered by the
   Security Policy;
   - Access to specified user and operational objects/attributes (e.g.
   read, add, delete, modify and related operations)
   - It must be possible to configure events to be recorded from the
   perspective of both subject and object/attribute;
   - All auditable events for a specified data recording level
   (minimum, basic, detailed....);
   - Both successful and unsuccessful authentication requests;
   - Modifications to the group of users that are part of a role;
   - All potential policy violations identified by analysis tools (e.g.
   detected replay attacks, denial of service attacks, etc.);
   - All actions taken by automated response tools.

   The following events need to be recorded, but since the recorded
   data will not likely be stored as part of the directory, how they
   are triggered is outside the scope of and LDAPext WG work:

   - Both successful and unsuccessful reading of information from the
   audit records;
   - Administrative commands, including log control commands (e.g.,
   setting disk threshold, manual log file rotation, etc.);
   - Changes to the system time.

   During normal directory operation the following events should always
   be logged:

   - Both successful and unsuccessful privileged user logins;
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000


   - Audit log failure due to storage exhaustion or network failure
   - Directory service shutdowns and restarts;
   - Administrative commands, including log control commands (e.g.,
   setting disk threshold, manual log file rotation, etc.);
   - All unsuccessful attempts to access resources.

   If the SP-DNA Directory Administrator does disable logging of any of
   the above events, that event itself must be logged.


4.4 What to record

   Each audit record saved must contain:

   a) event date and time - the event record time stamp should be
   consistent and reliable (i.e. use NTP) for all event records within
   the management domain and across all audit logs  (this is
   particularly applicable if/when multiple audit logs are used to
   differentiate between management and user operations);

   b) event type and specific information relevant to this particular
   event type;

   c)user identity association _ each auditable event must be
   associated with the user or application entity that initiated the
   event, including the authentication mechanism used;

   d) outcome (success/failure), and if failure, the cause and severity
   of the failure;

   e) Audit record sequence number - must allow at least 64K different
   sequence numbers to avoid frequent roll-over (useful in case date
   and time are unavailable or unreliable) (Note: this is different
   from a trackingId);

   f) source and destination addresses;

   g) names of resource(s) accessed.


4.5 Storage of recorded information

   As stated in an earlier section, the level of security provided for
   data collected through directory recording must be the same as that
   provided for the actual directory data being recorded.

   The following sections state the storage requirements for the log
   data, whether it is stored locally, or stored on a central log
   server, and requirements for the transfer of this data.


4.5.1 Local storage
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000


   If a node stores directory data log information locally (i.e. on the
   same machine as the directory is stored), then these are the
   requirements:

   a) Availability of log files: In order to ensure availability of the
   log information in the event of failure of the directory or data
   store, recorded data should reside outside of the directory service.

   b) Integrity: The logs must be protected against unauthorized
   deletion and/or modification.

   c) Integrity: The system should be able to detect modified or
   corrupted data. For example, a simple hash may provide assurance
   that the files have not been corrupted accidentally, a signed hash
   may provide assurance that the files have not been intentionally
   modified (there are obvious issues with processing overhead).

   d) Confidentiality: Only authorized persons must have access to the
   log data.

   e) The system should provide a threshold parameter controlling the
   issuance of warning alarms for impending log storage exhaustion.

   f) The system should provide a configurable action parameter in the
   event of impending log storage exhaustion (i.e. halt or wraparound).

   g) Logs must be maintained upon storage exhaustion or when archiving
   does not work.


   h) The system should avoid repeating the same message many times
   (e.g., "previous message repeated 257 times").


4.5.2 Central storage

   While a central log server would be outside the scope of a directory
   system, requirements for this server to store directory access log
   information are stated here for completeness.

   a) The log server must store log files in non-volatile storage

   b) It must store date and time of any failure of the logging
      function in non-volatile storage.

   c) It should be possible to configure the log collection system to
   prepend log file header information when it creates a new file.

   d) Integrity: The logs must be protected against unauthorized
   deletion and/or modification.


4.5.3 Audit data in transit
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000



   a) The directory system must record occurrence of any failure of the
   logging function and resume logging when the cause of failure is
   corrected.

   b) The directory system should send log file header information
   after system restart or when a connection is opened to the log
   collection system (if the system is not co-located with the
   directory system).

   c) Availability: the directory system should use a reliable
   transport protocol (e.g. TCP).

   d) Integrity: the directory system should be able to detect any
   modification or corruption of log file data.

   e) Non-repudiation: Upon connection set-up with a log collection
   system, the directory system should be able to verify the sender of
   the log file data.

   f) Confidentiality: the data must be kept confidential. For example,
   the data must be encrypted when in transit across an environment
   that is not physically secure.


4.6 Review of recorded info: reports, alarms, automated responses

   This section contains recommendations for methods of reviewing and
   using logged information.

   a) The Directory audit function should present the audit records in
   a manner suitable for the administrator to interpret the
   information. To this end, post-processing tools should be provided
   to facilitate the review of log file data and generation of audit
   reports.

   b) The system should provide automated means to analyze system
   activity in order to identify real/potential security violations,
   and to define alarms and automated responses based on the detection
   of real/potential security policy violations. This could involve
   virus detection, intrusion detection, examining various aspects of
   the material being transmitted for unauthorized content, analyzing
   characteristics of user profiles, analyzing audit records, and
   alerting operational personnel when misuse is detected or suspected.
   Threat actions could include actions or events that would deny
   services to authorized users, loss of secure state, and protocol
   failures.

   The following are examples of tools that can be used to analyze
   event data through the use of rules and known attack profiles,
   subsequently generating alarms and/or automated responses:

   Potential violation analysis
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000



   The audit log function should support threshold detection based on
   defined rule sets. These rule sets would be composed of identified
   accumulations/combinations of events known to indicate potential
   violations (e.g., repeated failed actions, requests for privileged
   information, multiple access requests used to aggregate data,
   attempted access of system files, unauthenticated responses known to
   indicate a potential security violation).

   Profile-based detection

   The audit log function may support the maintenance of historical
   usage profiles for a given user/group, and be able to determine
   variance from this profile in real-time or post-collection.  If
   monitoring profile variance in real-time, it should be possible to
   identify imminent security policy violation(s) and provide an
   automated response (e.g. disabling a user account).

   Simple and complex heuristics

   The audit log function may support the storage of system activity
   signatures, and be able to compare these signatures to current
   system activity.  Signatures may encompass both single and multi-
   step system activities, and be initiated by one or more
   authenticated entities.  Known activity signatures may be identified
   in real-time or post-collection, and be used to initiate an
   automated response.


5. Security Considerations

   This document provides requirements for tracking access to a
   directory system. Having a directory access recording function for
   directory systems that satisfies these requirements will increase
   the level of security of these systems in a measurable way, and
   provide information to assist in the recovery of corrupted or lost
   data.


6. References

   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   3 "SP-DNA Terminology", Directory Interoperability Forum (DIF)
      Service Provider Directory-enabled Network Applications (SP-DNA)
      WG, May 2000, <ftp://standards.nortelnetworks.com/dif-sp-
      dna/docs/latest/SP-DNATerminologyv3.doc>
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000



   4 CCITT Recommendation X.740, "Systems Management: Security Audit
      Trail Function", 1992-3.

   5 Common Criteria Implementation Board, "Common Criteria for
      Information Technology Security Evaluations v2.1", CCIMB-99-031,
      August 1999 - September 2000.

   6 Gallagher, Patrick R., Jr., "A Guide to Understanding Audit in
      Trusted Systems", National Computer Security Center, NCSC-TG-001,
      1987.


7.   Acknowledgments

   The requirements in this document were discussed within the SP-DNA
   WG. In particular, the authors would like to thank Rick Huber and
   Mark Wahl for their input.


8. Author's Addresses

   Dave Elliott
   Aventail Corp
   808 Howell St.
   Seattle, Washington 98101
   (206)215-0062
   Email: <delliott@aventail.com>

   Nancy Greene
   Nortel Networks
   Ottawa, Canada
   Email: <ngreene@nortelnetworks.com>

   Sue (Sandi) A. Miklos
   Department of Defense, V51
   9800 Savage Rd.
   Fort Meade, MD 270550-6730, USA
   Email: samiklo@missi.ncsc.mil



Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
                 <draft-spdna-ldapext-recrecs-00.txt>         Nov 2000


   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

