

Individual Submission                                       R. Harrison
Internet Draft                                             Novell, Inc.
Document: draft-rharrison-ldap-framing-profile-00.txt    March 21, 2001
Intended Category: Informational


                 Profile for Framing LDAPv3 Operations


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


1. Abstract

   The document "LDAPv3: Grouping of Related Operations" [GROUPING]
   specifies a set of LDAPv3 operations and an LDAPv3 control that can
   be used to identify and manage sets of LDAP operations that are
   members of related groups. Collectively, these "grouping" constructs
   provide a general framework for defining specific LDAPv3 grouping
   types with their associated processing semantics.

   There are times when an LDAP application wants to specify a set of
   related operations that are framed within a begin-end pair. This
   document describes a general method that protocol designers can use
   to provide framing semantics using LDAPv3 grouping [GROUPING]
   constructs. It also outlines the elements that must be defined by
   protocol designers using the grouping framework to define new
   grouping types with special emphasis on issues surrounding the
   definition of framing semantics within the grouping framework.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.1. Definitions


Harrison  Individual Submission - Expires September 21, 2001  [Page 1]

                        LDAPv3 Framing Profile          March 21, 2001

   The term "grouping framework" refers to the grouping protocol
   operations, controls, and their associated semantics as defined in
   [GROUPING].

   The term "grouping type" is used to describe a unique set of
   semantics that associate a group LDAP operations using the grouping
   framework.

   Each of the protocol elements defined by the grouping framework
   contain an optional type-specific payload value referred to as
   "createGroupValue", "endGroupValue" or simply "groupValue" depending
   on the specific protocol element in which it is included. In this
   document, the term "payload values" refers to any or all of these
   type-specific payload values.

3. Applicability Statement

   This document is provided to assist protocol designers using the
   grouping framework to design new grouping types that use framing
   semantics. The contents of this document are informational in nature
   and SHALL NOT supersede the details of the grouping framework
   defined in [GROUPING].


4. Framing Operations Using Grouping Constructs

   Each grouping type must define and document the following items:

     - The OID of the grouping type

     - Certain details of the protocol operations used by the grouping
       type (more will be said on this later)

     - The semantics of the grouping type

   Assuming that a grouping type with the desired framing semantics has
   been defined, a set of operations can be framed using the protocol
   elements defined in [GROUPING] in the following manner:

     - To begin the frame, a client sends a createGroupingRequest
       operation with the OID identifying the grouping type with the
       desired framing semantics.

     - The server sends a createGroupingResponse to the client. The
       response contains a cookie identifying this instance of the
       requested grouping type. This cookie is hereafter referred to as
       the "group's cookie."

     - The client sends the set of operations in the frame to the
       server. Each operation includes a groupingControl containing the
       group's cookie.

     - To end the frame, the client sends an endGroupingRequest to the
       server with the group's cookie.

Harrison  Individual Submission - Expires September 21, 2001  [Page 2]

                        LDAPv3 Framing Profile          March 21, 2001


     - The server responds with an endGroupingResponse.

   The following sections enumerate all of the items that must be
   defined and documented to fully specify a grouping type with framing
   semantics. Other items MAY need to be defined and documented to
   produce a complete specification.

5. Defining Grouping Type Protocol Elements

   The grouping framework specifies the following elements of protocol:

     - createGroupingRequest
     - createGroupingResponse
     - groupingControl
     - endGroupingRequest
     - endGroupingResponse
     - endGroupingNotice

   The protocol information sent in these protocol elements is defined
   by the framework itself with two exceptions: the grouping type OID,
   and type-specific payload values.

5.1. Grouping Type OID

   Each grouping type must be uniquely identified by an OID, and
   clients requesting the server to create a grouping must specify the
   appropriate OID for the grouping type they want the server to
   create. Protocol designers using the grouping framework to design a
   new grouping type MUST therefore define an OID to represent that
   grouping type.

5.2. Type-specific Payload Values

   Protocol designers using the grouping framework to define a new
   grouping type MUST describe the payload values used by the grouping
   type. The structure and data contained in all payload values that
   are not opaque to the client MUST be fully defined. Payload values
   that are non-present MUST be documented as such. Also, the semantics
   associated with payload values (or lack thereof) MUST be defined(see
   Section 5.1. Defining Payload Value Semantics).

6. Defining Grouping Type Semantics

   Protocol designers using the grouping framework to design a new
   grouping type SHOULD consider defining semantics in the following
   areas:

   - Grouping framework semantics
   - Payload value semantics
   - Nested grouping and interleaved operation semantics

   The definition of other semantics MAY be necessary to fully specify
   a grouping type.

Harrison  Individual Submission - Expires September 21, 2001  [Page 3]

                        LDAPv3 Framing Profile          March 21, 2001


6.1. Grouping Framework Semantics

   The grouping framework defines a number of semantics that all
   grouping types must follow. Refer to [GROUPING] Section 5.
   "Operational Semantics".

6.2. Payload Value Semantics

   Because payload values are specific to each grouping type, the
   semantics associated with payload values MUST be fully specified.
   When a grouping type does not use one or more payload values the
   semantics associated with non-present payload values MUST be
   specified.

6.3. Nested Grouping and Interleaved Group and Operation Semantics

   The semantics of the grouping framework are general enough to allow
   nested groups, interleaved groups, and non-grouped operations
   interleaved within a set of grouped operations.  Based on the
   requirements of a specific grouping type--especially one that
   provides framing semantics--designers may want or need to
   specifically restrict the usage of one or more of these facilities.
   These restrictions, if any, MUST be specified. The semantics of
   nested groups SHOULD be specified.

6. Security Considerations

   This document describes the process of defining grouping mechanisms
   that provide framing semantics, so all of the security
   considerations listed in [GROUPING] apply to this document.

7. References

   [GROUPING]
        K. Zeilenga, "LDAPv3: Grouping of Related Operations",
        draft-zeilenga-ldap-grouping-xx.txt, a work in progress.

    [LDAPv3]
        Wahl, M., Howes, T., and S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory
        Access Protocol (v3)", RFC 2251, December 1997.

8. Acknowledgments

   The author would like to acknowledge Kurt Zeilenga for his work in
   defining the grouping framework and for providing suggestions on how
   this topic might be approached.

9. Author's Address

   Roger Harrison
   Novell, Inc.
   1800 S. Novell Place
   Provo, UT 84606

Harrison  Individual Submission - Expires September 21, 2001  [Page 4]

                        LDAPv3 Framing Profile          March 21, 2001

   +1 801 861 2642
   roger_harrison@novell.com


Appendix A - Document Revision History

A.1 draft-rharrison-ldap-framingProfile-00.txt

   Initial revision of draft.

Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2001. All Rights Reserved. This
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



















Harrison  Individual Submission - Expires September 21, 2001  [Page 5]

